---
inFeed: true
hasPage: false
inNav: false
isBasedOnUrl: 'http://money.visualcapitalist.com/all-of-the-worlds-money-and-markets-in-one-visualization/'
inLanguage: null
starred: true
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2015-12-27T12:30:38.588Z'
dateModified: '2015-12-27T12:30:18.146Z'
author: []
title: Quantifying Money
sourcePath: _posts/2015-12-27-a0d3a4ce-3c56-4d74-995a-a6f7b190014d.md
published: true
authors: []
publisher:
  name: money.visualcapitalist.com
  domain: money.visualcapitalist.com
  url: null
  favicon: null
_context: 'http://schema.org'
_type: Article

---
How much money is there?  More than you probably think.  Consider that cash in circulation is a fraction of the money used in the world.  Even the money printed by the Fed is dwarfed by the stock and derivatives market.  Derivatives alone may make up $1200 trillion worth of value!

Humans have always found multiplicative inventions for money.  What started as hard assets only, was multiplied by the introduction of basic monetary systems such as coin and cash.  The introduction of credit and reserve lending created more wealth based on coinage and cash. Compounding credit and reserve lending, equities were created to allow society to draw additional value out of our commercializing economies.  The latest iteration of money called derivatives is truely a massive wealth introduction with a value estimated north of $600 trillion.

A new multiplicative invention is inevitable.  Historically, it's completely logical that humans would eventually add another layer on top of the complex wealth system we've created.

What could that system possibly look like with another iteration?  There is a massive gap in our existing economies.  We have complex financial systems, complicated assets, massive internet economies, and global trade.  A unifying financial product would have to be digital, programmable money.  Bitcoin is a perfect example of something that has multiplicative potential in the current monetary system.

Modern money needs to have two characteristics to have value. Easy to transport and universally acceptable.  With our existing global trade engines money that can be transported globally without borders and moved almost instantly is extremely important.  Political motives also make existing currency status unpredictable.  While the US dollar has managed to act as the world's reserve currency for decades, growing economies like China are actively working to dethrone the dollar.  China's yuan having been recently accepted into the IMF is proof of their intentions.

Financial products in the stock and derivatives markets are also due for an upgrade.  Stocks are traded on legacy systems and harbored by custodians.  These markets exist in their respective countries, somewhat limiting available liquidity. Derivatives products aren't much different and are also quite complex, often depending on multiple variables to derive their value.  This creates complexity that can be increasingly less transparent.  Financial products can be programmed into bitcoin or a similar digital currency, allowing for transparent and global trade.

Bitcoin's multiplicative value comes from the fact that it can represent, not replace, all the existing money and financial products that the globe uses today.  Throughout history we have always maintained lesser iterations in our quest to expand wealth.  There is no need to remove existing fiat currencies and legacy money systems.  Even less obvious assets and trade can be programmed into a digital environment.  The door is opened up for smart contract execution in industries like real estate or entire companies programmed to function automatically.  

From the representation of all existing money solutions and products, to the creation of brand new features, it's obvious that a digital solution is the next multiplicative invention in money.  Bitcoin is currently positioned as the front runner but the future is anyone's guess.  What's most incredible is that the technology that captures this next multiplicative advancement will be worth the combination of all the money technology it represents.   A valuation between $600 trillion and $2 quadrillion may be quite reasonable for this new industry.